Title: A Generative Model for Closed-Loop Microsimulation of Signalized Intersections

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.23588v1

Published Time: Tue, 23 Jun 2026 03:31:17 GMT

Number of Pages: 13

Markdown Content:
> IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS 1

# A Generative Model for Closed-Loop Microsimulation of Signalized Intersections 

Yash Ranjan, Rahul Sengupta, Anand Rangarajan, and Sanjay Ranka, Fellow, IEEE 

Abstract —Traffic microsimulators rely on hand-crafted behav-ior models that reproduce aggregate flow but miss the heteroge-neous interactions between vehicles at signalized intersections. Learned trajectory predictors capture richer interactions but are short-horizon and tend to be unstable when run in closed loop. We present Enactor , an actor-centric generative model for closed-loop intersection microsimulation. The model focuses on vehicles; pedestrians are included as context that can influence vehicle decisions but are not predicted directly. Dynamic actors and lane polylines are encoded in polar coordinates referenced to the intersection center, and each actor sees the rear-bumper position of its leader so that deceleration can be terminated at the right place. A transformer with separate spatial and temporal attention blocks predicts a distribution over each actor’s next-step motion ( s, α); positions are propagated by a deterministic kinematic update. Training uses a closed-loop curriculum so the model is exposed to its own predictions before it has to rely on them at inference. We evaluate Enactor in two regimes. In a 4,000 -second simulation-in-the-loop test at two intersection geometries, En-actor controls every dynamic vehicle against a continuously refreshing actor set rather than the fixed cohort that learned trajectory predictors are usually evaluated against. It recovers the SUMO data generator’s speed and travel-time distributions with KL divergence over an order of magnitude lower than a recent transformer baseline on travel time, and substantially lower on speed (roughly 5× lower at Site 1), and reduces red-light violations relative to the same baseline by more than an order of magnitude. An ablation isolates the leader rear-bumper feature as the change with the largest effect on intersection-aware safety metrics; close-range interaction realism (TTC) remains the main open problem. We also evaluate on real-world field data. We apply the same architecture to naturalistic vehicle trajectories from a fish-eye camera at a signalized intersection, with a multi-horizon predictive evaluation that fits the single-pass nature of the recording. Enactor outperforms a constant-velocity baseline at every horizon evaluated. 

Index Terms —Traffic intersection, microsimulation, SUMO, generative model, transformer, attention, trajectory prediction, YOLO, signalized intersection. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

# TRAFFIC microsimulators such as SUMO and MATSim are widely used to evaluate road-network performance under what-if conditions: intersection design, signal timing, demand management. The behavior models that drive their actors are typically hand-crafted and calibrated at the popu-lation level. Car-following models like the Intelligent Driver Model and the Krauss model assume smooth, rational drivers; pedestrian dynamics rely on force-based formulations such as  

> The authors are with the Department of Computer and Information Science and Engineering, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611, USA. E-mail:
> {yashranjan, rahulseng }@ufl.edu, {anand, ranka }@cise.ufl.edu. A preliminary version of this work appeared in [1].

the Social Force Model. These models work well for aggre-gate flow but reproduce poorly the heterogeneous, sometimes aggressive or distracted behavior that occurs at intersections, and the data needed to calibrate actor-specific parameters is rarely available [2]. Data-driven trajectory predictors learn multi-agent inter-actions from observed trajectories [3], [4], and generative variants are now used to simulate the motion of surrounding agents in autonomous-driving contexts [5]. Two problems remain. When such models are run in closed loop over long horizons, prediction errors compound and the rollout drifts away from the training distribution. And capturing physically plausible, socially consistent behavior even at short horizons usually requires large amounts of high-quality data, because the model has to learn physical constraints and interaction dynamics implicitly from observation alone. Intersections are a tough case for both kinds of approach. They are conflict zones where vehicle and pedestrian trajec-tories cross, where a substantial fraction of crashes occur, and where stochastic driver decisions interact with strong structural constraints from geometry, lane topology, and signal timing. We exploit that structure. Enactor is an actor-centric generative model that combines a polar-coordinate state rep-resentation aligned with intersection geometry, a transformer-based interaction module, and a closed-loop training schedule that exposes the model to its own predictions during training. Each actor also sees the rear-bumper position of its leader on the same lane, when one exists; this geometric cue tells the model where deceleration should end, and our ablations show it is the single change with the largest effect on intersection-aware safety metrics. We argue that stable long-horizon closed-loop rollout, aggregate-flow realism, and intersection-aware safety realism are three separate objectives, addressed by different design choices, and that doing well on one does not automatically translate into doing well on the others. We evaluate Enactor in two regimes. On data generated by SUMO at two intersection geometries, we run a closed-loop simulation-in-the-loop protocol in which Enactor con-trols every dynamic actor for 40 ,000 timesteps (4,000 s). On naturalistic data from a fish-eye camera at a signalized intersection, processed through a YOLO-based detection-and-tracking pipeline, we evaluate single-pass per-actor prediction at multi-second horizons. The two regimes answer different questions because they have to: real-world recordings capture one realization of the world and offer no replayable ground-truth alternative future, so closed-loop rollout against ground truth is not available there. 

Scope: vehicles as targets, pedestrians as context: Pedes-trians are present at signalized intersections and can influence  

> arXiv:2606.23588v1 [cs.RO] 22 Jun 2026 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS 2

vehicle behavior: a vehicle yields, decelerates, or accelerates differently depending on whether a pedestrian is in or near the conflict zone. We include pedestrians in the model as neighbors — their state enters each vehicle’s spatial-attention context and indirectly influences its predicted trajectory. We do not study pedestrian behavior itself: pedestrian trajectories are not evaluation targets, and we make no claim about the realism of pedestrian motion the model might generate. Treating pedestrians as first-class targets is left for future work. A central feature of the simulator regime is that the cohort of dynamic actors changes over time: actors enter the intersection on one approach, traverse it, leave on another, while new actors arrive continuously at the perimeter. Most learned trajectory predictors evaluate against a fixed cohort of actors at fixed prompt times, which avoids the question of how the model behaves when the scene graph it has to reason over is itself non-stationary. Sustaining a coherent closed-loop rollout under a continuously refreshing actor set, without diverging from the road network or producing implausible trajectories over thousands of timesteps, is one of the main technical problems this paper addresses. Both Enactor and the IntTrajSim baseline are evaluated under the same 4,000 -second SUMO-in-the-loop protocol against this non-stationary actor cohort, and the resulting metrics measure relative rule compliance and aggregate-flow realism inside that protocol. Naturalistic trajectories bring a separate problem the simulator does not have: bounding-box jitter from object detection, especially perpendicular to the direction of motion, produces artificially large frame-to-frame velocities and accelerations, and we evaluate both smoothed and raw variants to see how much this upstream noise affects what the model learns. The contributions of this paper are:  

> •

a polar-coordinate, geometry-aware state representation for intersection actors and map elements;  

> •

a transformer-based generative model trained in closed loop and evaluated as a full microsimulator in SUMO across two intersection geometries, sustaining stable roll-outs over 4,000 seconds against a continuously refreshing actor cohort rather than a fixed-cohort evaluation;  

> •

an ablation isolating the contribution of including the leader’s rear-bumper position as an input feature;  

> •

a direct comparison against IntTrajSim under the same closed-loop protocol, reducing red-light violations by more than an order of magnitude ( 5 vs. 169 or 175 , de-pending on the baseline’s post-processing) at the first in-tersection and showing similarly large gaps at the second, together with trajectory-reconstruction benchmarks where ADE/FDE are the primary cross-model comparison and NLL is reported under each model’s own predictive distribution; and  

> •

an evaluation on real-world field data, by applying the same architecture to naturalistic vehicle trajectories un-der a multi-horizon predictive evaluation, where Enactor outperforms a constant-velocity baseline at 2, 5, and 

10 second horizons. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Sec-tion II surveys related work in trajectory forecasting, scene-level world models, and intersection-specific simulation and evaluation. Section III formalizes the modeling task. Sec-tion IV describes the Enactor architecture and the closed-loop training procedure. Section V describes the simulator and real-world data sources together with the preprocessing applied to the latter. Sections VI and VII report the simulator and real-world studies. Section VIII concludes. II. R ELATED WORKS 

We organize related work into four groups: foundational interaction-aware trajectory prediction, attention-based predic-tion architectures, prediction at signalized and unsignalized intersections, and scene-level world models for autonomous driving. 

Interaction-aware trajectory prediction. A first genera-tion of learned trajectory predictors modeled an actor’s future motion as a function of its own history and a learned represen-tation of nearby agents. Social LSTM [6] introduced a pooling mechanism that lets recurrent encoders share hidden states across pedestrians in a crowd. Convolutional social pooling [7] extended the same idea to vehicles on highways using a spatial grid. Social GAN [8] added a generative formulation, sampling diverse plausible futures rather than committing to a single mode. Trajectron++ [3] combined LSTM-based history encod-ing with graph attention for heterogeneous-agent interaction. These models are short-horizon predictors evaluated open-loop against ground truth; they are not designed to control the dynamics of all surrounding actors recursively over thousands of timesteps and they typically do not model traffic-signal state. 

Attention-based prediction architectures. Since [9], at-tention has displaced recurrence as the default sequence-modeling mechanism for trajectory prediction, in part because it scales better with the number of interacting agents. [10] applied multi-head attention directly to neighboring vehicles for highway prediction. AI-TP [11] formalized interaction-awareness through learned attention weights between an ego actor and its neighbors. [12] factored the prediction into spatial and temporal attention blocks, a decomposition we also adopt. The hierarchical transformer of [13] addresses heterogeneous agent classes through transferable attention modules. MTR [4] achieves state-of-the-art motion forecasting through a global intention-localization module combined with local refinement. HDGT [14] formulates the scene as a heterogeneous graph and applies graph transformers to encode it. The attention literature is the architectural lineage of Enactor; what differs in our work is not the use of attention but the closed-loop training and evaluation regime, the polar state representation, and the integration of leader-rear-bumper geometric cues directly into the actor’s input. 

Prediction at signalized and unsignalized intersections. 

A second body of work specializes trajectory prediction to the intersection setting, where signals and lane geometry constrain plausible behavior. Bayesian network models for red-light running [15] and turning intention [16] encode signal-phase and lane-geometry priors explicitly. Hierarchical predic-tors [17] couple signal state to interactive agent behavior in a IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS 3

structured way. [18] quantifies the effect of including signal phase as a forecasting input near signalized intersections, and D2-tpred [19] treats the signal-induced discontinuity as an explicit dependency in the trajectory model. KI-GAN [20] injects intersection-specific knowledge into a generative adver-sarial trajectory predictor. At unsignalized intersections, [21] produces multi-modal interaction-aware predictions, and the macro-micro hierarchical attention method MMH-STA [22] addresses roundabouts. Generative trajectory prediction at intersections was explored earlier through interaction-based GANs [23]. IntersectionNet [24] unrolls trajectories in curvi-linear coordinates with geometry-aware attention. All of these are short-horizon predictors evaluated against ground-truth alternative futures; none performs the closed-loop, full-actor-set rollout for thousands of timesteps that we use to evaluate Enactor in the simulator regime. 

Scene-level world models for autonomous driving. Athird line of work moves beyond per-actor prediction to scene-level generative simulation, including TrafficBots [5] on the Waymo Open Motion Dataset [25], the graph-transformer foundation model of [26] instantiated as TransWorldNG [27], the city-scale SceneDiffuser++ [28], and the world-model-as-simulator benchmark of [29]. These works model the agents 

around an AV ego vehicle; we instead simulate the entire signalized intersection without a privileged ego, with signal compliance, lane geometry, and intersection-aware safety met-rics as first-class concerns. The work most directly comparable to ours is IntTra-jSim [30], which we use as a baseline. IntTrajSim shares the closed-loop intersection-simulation framing and uses an attention-based architecture, but operates in Cartesian coor-dinates and applies a post-processing step to enforce stop-line behavior. [31] develops an intersection-specific evaluation framework that demonstrates that low trajectory reconstruction error does not imply rule-compliant behavior such as the avoidance of red-light violations or unsafe time-to-collision events; we adopt and extend that metric set in Section VI. [32] has begun exploring richer behavior representations specifi-cally for intersection microsimulation. In summary, our novelty is not the use of a transformer or of attention but the combination of a geometry-aligned polar state representation, the inclusion of leader-rear-bumper geometric cues as explicit input features, and a closed-loop training and evaluation protocol designed for intersection microsimulation. III. P ROBLEM DEFINITION 

We formulate two related tasks. The simulator task is the closed-loop generation of next-state distributions for every dynamic actor in an intersection scene, repeated recursively to produce long-horizon trajectories. The real-world task is the single-pass prediction of an actor’s future positions over a short horizon given a fixed history. The two tasks share an architecture and a training objective; they differ in evaluation, because real-world recordings capture a single realization of the world and cannot be replayed in closed loop against a ground-truth alternative future. 

Notation: An intersection scene contains a set of actors comprising static actors , namely lane centerlines, lane bound-aries, and other infrastructural elements, and dynamic actors ,namely vehicles, pedestrians, and the traffic signal phases. In this paper, target dynamic actors are vehicles. Pedestrians, when present in the real-world data, are included as contextual neighbors — their state contributes to each vehicle’s spatial-attention context — but they are not evaluated as prediction targets and the model is not trained to make claims about pedestrian behavior. We adopt an actor-centric perspective: the future state of each target dynamic actor is predicted from its own history together with the state of its neighbors, the local map, and the local signal. Following [33] we formulate the problem as a hidden Markov model 

H = ⟨S , O, p (ot | st), p (st | st−1)⟩,

where S is the set of true world states, O is the set of observations, p(ot | st) is the emission distribution, and 

p(st | st−1) governs the latent transition. The marginal observation dynamics are 

pworld (ot | st−1) = Ep(st|st−1) p(ot|st).

The goal is to learn an approximation qworld (ot | oc<t ), where the context 

oc<t = [omap , osignals , o t−H−1, . . . , o t−1]

consists of the static map, signal observations, and the past H

observations. For the actor-centric formulation we model 

qagent (oit | oc(i) 

> <t

), oc(i) 

> t

= [ map it, signal it, o it, n 1..N (i,t ) 

> t

],

(1) where oit is the state of actor i, njt is the state of its j-th neighbor, and N (i, t ) is the number of neighbors. Follow-ing [34] we use a polar representation that aligns with the curved trajectories typical at intersections: 

oit = ( r, sin θ, cos θ, s, sin α, cos α), (2) with r the radial distance from the intersection center, θ the angular position, s the linear speed, and α the heading. For static elements we use the polyline-based HD-map representation of [35]: map it ∈ RP it ×L×6, where P it is the number of polylines near actor i and L is the num-ber of vectors per polyline; each vector is encoded as 

(r, sin θ, cos θ, ℓ, sin α, cos α) with ℓ the segment length and 

α its orientation. These polylines also serve as reference trajectories: by learning the correlation between an actor’s state and the nearest reference polyline, the model reduces off-road excursions on turns. The traffic signal is represented as the lane-end vector with the one-hot signal state appended, 

(r, sin θ, cos θ, ℓ, sin α, cos α, esig ), where esig ∈ { 0, 1}K en-codes the current phase ( K = 4 for red / yellow / flashing-yellow / green). 

Prediction target: The model outputs a mixture-of-Gaussians distribution over the actor’s next-step speed ( s) and change in heading ( α). At inference time, this distribution is sampled and the actor’s next position (r, θ ) is computed by a deterministic kinematic update from the sampled (s, α ) and the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS 4

current state (Fig. 1). Concretely, with (xt, y t) the Cartesian position derived from (rt, θ t), and ∆t the timestep, 

xt+1 = xt+st+1 ∆t cos αt+1 , yt+1 = yt+st+1 ∆t sin αt+1 ,

(3) and the next polar state is rt+1 =

q

x2 

> t+1

+ y2

> t+1

, θt+1 =atan2( yt+1 , x t+1 ). We predict α directly in radians, without explicit wrapping to [−π, π ]; at 10 fps the frame-to-frame heading change is small enough that wrapping does not arise in practice. The number of mixture components is a hyperpa-rameter (Table II); empirically, a small mixture suffices for the simulator regime where the data distribution is narrower, while a larger mixture is needed for the real-world regime to capture multimodal behavior. Trajectory-reconstruction metrics (ADE, FDE) are computed in metric Cartesian coordinates after converting each rolled-out polar state to a position in the intersection-centered ground frame. 

Connection to training and evaluation: We train the per-actor model by minimizing the negative log-likelihood of the ground-truth next-step (s, α ) under qagent (· | oc(i) 

> <t

),which is a per-actor surrogate for the marginal pworld above. The closed-loop curriculum of Section IV narrows the gap between conditioning on observed context during training and conditioning on the model’s own samples at inference — the main failure mode of this approximation. The closed-loop simulator-in-the-loop evaluation of Section VI also goes beyond the standard fixed-cohort, fixed-prompt-time setup: it lets the scene graph evolve, with actors entering and leaving the intersection, which is closer to the marginal pworld above, and it covers a much longer time range, so the evaluation reflects how the scene evolves rather than averaging per-actor errors at a single horizon. IV. A RCHITECTURE 

The Enactor architecture has two attention blocks, applied in sequence: a spatial block that captures actor–actor and actor– map interactions at each timestep, and a temporal block that aggregates the spatial embeddings over the history window into a distribution over the next-step (s, α ). The spatial-then-temporal decomposition is an explicit choice; it is more tractable than fully joint attention over space and time, and it allows the spatial block to be reused identically during closed-loop unrolling at inference time. 

A. Per-Actor Input 

At each timestep t, the input for actor i comprises (i) the actor’s own polar state oit; (ii) the states of the N nearest dynamic neighbors within a fixed radius, padded and masked when fewer than N are present; (iii) the local map polylines within a fixed radius; and (iv) the lane-end signal vectors for the actor’s current and adjacent lanes. The actor’s input additionally includes the polar coordinates of the rear bumper of the leading vehicle on the actor’s lane, when one exists; the contribution of this feature is isolated by an ablation in Section VI. 

B. Spatial Block 

We embed each input element with a multilayer perceptron into a common embedding dimension. The actor’s embedding serves as the query in a self-attention layer [9] with the em-beddings of its neighbors, map polylines, and signal vectors as keys and values. The output is an interaction-aware embedding for the actor at each timestep in the history. 

C. Temporal Block 

The sequence of H spatial embeddings is concatenated with a learned query embedding and passed through a temporal attention module that produces a single embedding summa-rizing the actor’s history. This embedding parameterizes the distribution over the actor’s next-step (s, α ).

D. Closed-Loop Training 

The training loss is the negative log-likelihood of the ground-truth next-step (s, α ) under the predicted distribution. To mitigate covariate shift during closed-loop rollout, we use a curriculum schedule: the model receives ground-truth context for the first portion of training, and ground-truth context is progressively replaced by the model’s own samples for an increasing fraction of timesteps. We use the AdamW optimizer with a cosine learning-rate schedule and gradient clipping. 

Hyperparameters: A comprehensive list of hyperparam-eters used during training is provided in Table I, with archi-tecture sizes in Table II. We use batch size 256 , 4000 warmup steps for the learning-rate scheduler, and dropout ratio 0.1. The same architecture is used for both the simulator and real-world regimes; the regimes differ only in the number of mixture components used in the output head ( 5 for the simulator regime, 25 for the real-world regime; see Section III). V. D ATA SOURCES 

We use two complementary data sources: SUMO simulation data for closed-loop training and evaluation, and a fish-eye-camera deployment for the real-world study. 

A. Simulator Data 

We use SUMO to generate trajectory data for two inter-section geometries. The first is a digital reconstruction of the intersection at West University Avenue and NW 17th Street in Gainesville, Florida; the second is the same intersection with the middle through-lanes of the eastbound and west-bound approaches removed. The two geometries are shown in Fig. 2. SUMO is configured with calibrated arrival rates per approach and a fixed-time signal plan; the simulator generates vehicular traffic only, consistent with the vehicle-centric scope established in Section I. We simulate 6 hours ( 21 ,600 s) of traffic at a temporal resolution of 0.1 s, yielding approximately 

1,241 ,600 training exemplars. Table III describes the number of vehicle arriving per hour at each leg of the intersection, for both simulated and real world dataset. As seen in 2, the intersection at West University Avenue does not allow incoming traffic from the north leg which we have recreated in the digital map inside SUMO. The real world dataset has IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS 5Spatial Attention 

State Encoder 

Query Key Value 

Encoded 

Actors 

Encoded 

Signal 

Encoded 

Neighbor 

Encoded 

Polyline 

Concatenate 

> Vectorize

Scene Embedding 

Temporal Attention 

Spatial Attention 

Scene Embedding 

Query Key Value 

PE 

History Scene Embedding Learned Query Embedding 

State Encoder 

Key Value 

Encoded 

Signal 

Encoded 

Neighbor 

Encoded 

Polyline 

Concatenate Vectorize 

Encoded 

Actor 

Query  

> Sample
> GMM
> (s,𝛼 )

## ×Η ×F

Neighborship 

> (d)
> (c)
> (b)
> (a)

Fig. 1. Transformer-based architecture for learning multi-actor interactions and generating trajectories. (a) SUMO initializes the traffic scene from a set of control parameters; for each vehicle, neighboring actors are identified and their states vectorized. (b) A state encoder maps the actor and its neighbors into embeddings, processed by a spatial attention module to produce interaction-aware spatial embeddings over the previous H timesteps. (c) The sequence of spatial embeddings is combined with a learned query embedding and passed through a temporal attention module that parameterizes a distribution over the actor’s next-step (s, α ). At inference time this distribution is sampled and the next position is obtained by a deterministic kinematic update. (d) The newly sampled state, together with updated neighbor states, is re-encoded and fed back, enabling recursive trajectory unrolling in closed loop.               

> Model History Length Prediction Horizon Radius Normalization Factor Speed Normalization Factor Max Neighbors Neighbor Radius Max Polyline Polyline Radius Signal Radius
> Enactor 20 20 50 10 10 50 10 20 20

TABLE I DATA -PROCESSING PARAMETERS FOR TRAINING ON SIMULATED AND REAL -WORLD DATA .

trajectories which are incomplete due to false detections and missed tracks. The trajectories either abruptly start or end in the middle of the intersection. We do not map these vehicles to a cluster and use these vehicles only as neighbors of other vehicles with valid trajectories. 

B. Real-World Data and Preprocessing 

The real-world data are collected from a fish-eye camera installed at a signalized intersection adjacent to the University of Florida campus. The video stream is processed by a YOLO-based detection-and-tracking pipeline developed within our laboratory, which produces per-frame bounding boxes and persistent identities for vehicles and pedestrians. We use one hour of video for the experiments reported in Section VII. Lane-wise signal phases are recovered from the same video by visual inspection of the traffic movement. The raw trajectories returned by the pipeline contain two characteristic noise sources. The first is intermittent missing frames for individual actors, caused by short-lived detec-tion failures. The second, and more consequential, is lateral drift along the direction perpendicular to the actor’s motion, caused by jitter in the bounding-box centroid that the tracking step cannot fully suppress. Without correction, the resulting position sequences exhibit artificially large velocities and accelerations whenever the centroid steps sideways between consecutive frames; this is most pronounced on curved paths, where the lateral noise is locally tangent to the trajectory’s true curvature and is therefore difficult to distinguish from real heading change. Training on uncorrected trajectories therefore exposes the model to higher-frequency artifacts in the dynamics signal; whether this hurts the learned predictor enough to warrant correction is the empirical question we test in Section VII. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS 6

Model Embedding Size Spatial Attention Heads Spatial Attention Layers Temporal Attention Heads Temporal Attention Layers GMM Modes 

Enactor 256 4 8 4 8 5 / 25 

TABLE II ENACTOR ARCHITECTURE PARAMETERS FOR TRAINING ON SIMULATED AND REAL -WORLD DATA . T HE SAME ARCHITECTURE IS USED IN BOTH REGIMES ; ONLY THE NUMBER OF MIXTURE COMPONENTS IN THE GMM HEAD OVER (s, α ) DIFFERS — 5 FOR THE SIMULATOR REGIME , 25 FOR THE REAL -WORLD REGIME (SHOWN AS “5 / 25 ” IN THE TABLE ). 

Fig. 2. Digital representations of the two simulated intersections. left: SUMO representation of the intersection at West University. right: The same intersection with the middle through-lanes of the east- and westbound approaches removed. 

Data Source East Leg(/H) South Leg(/H) West Leg(/H) North Leg(/H) Unmapped (/H) Test Train Split 

Simulated 307 323 289 - - 0.9 Real World 570 831 522 720 1504 0.9 

TABLE III TRAFFIC DATA DESCRIPTION 

Data Source Train (Number of Actors) Test (Number of Actors) Train (Seconds) Test (Seconds) 

Simulated 4959 601 19440 2160 Real World 3386 922 3240 360 

TABLE IV TRAIN /T EST SPLIT DESCRIPTION 

We fill missing frames by linear interpolation between the last and next observed positions of the actor. We address lateral drift by fitting a smoothing spline to each actor’s trajectory in a metric ground frame and projecting each observed position onto the spline. Fig. 4 shows the effect: the raw trace has visible lateral oscillation around the lane centerline, which the spline projection removes while leaving the longitudinal motion alone. This step is about measurement error, not modeling. The YOLO bounding-box pipeline adds lateral jitter that is not part of the actor’s true motion, and we test whether removing it gives the downstream model a cleaner dynamics signal. Whether smoothing actually helps a learned trajectory predictor is itself an empirical question. A smoothing spline acts as a low-pass filter, so it should help short-horizon prediction — where centroid jitter is uninformative noise the model should not have to fit — and may hurt longer-horizon prediction, where the small bias smoothing introduces in the current state can compound. We report both Enactor-Smooth 

Data Median displacement (m) 95th-percentile displacement (m) Median delta head (radian) 95th-percentile delta head (radian) 

Raw 0.0 1.2292 0.0175 2.7255 Smoothed 0.0 1.2288 0.0006 3.0845 Change 0.0 0.0004 0.0169 -0.359 

TABLE V QUANTIFYING THE EFFECT OF SPLINE SMOOTHING ON TRAJECTORY MEASUREMENTS . T HE MEDIAN PER -FRAME DISPLACEMENT IS REPORTED AS 0.0 BECAUSE A SUBSTANTIAL FRACTION OF FRAMES BELONG TO STATIONARY VEHICLES (E.G., HALTED AT A RED PHASE ), WHICH DOMINATE THE MEDIAN ON BOTH RAW AND SMOOTHED TRACES . T HE DOMINANT EFFECT OF SMOOTHING IS ON THE MEDIAN FRAME -TO -FRAME HEADING CHANGE , WHICH DROPS BY ROUGHLY 97% 

(0.0175 → 0.0006 RAD ); DISPLACEMENT STATISTICS ARE ESSENTIALLY UNCHANGED , AND THE 95 TH -PERCENTILE HEADING CHANGE IS NOT IMPROVED BY SMOOTHING .

(the smoothed variant) and Enactor-Raw (the unsmoothed variant) in Section VII and discuss the trade-off there. Enactor-Smooth should be interpreted as a training-input denoising variant rather than an online preprocessing pipeline. Enactor-Raw and Enactor-Smooth are evaluated on the same held-out raw vehicle histories and raw future targets, so the comparison isolates the effect of smoothing the training input. To avoid information leakage across the chronological train/test split, spline fitting for Enactor-Smooth is performed only on trajectories within the training segment; held-out future positions are not used in constructing smoothed training inputs. A causal smoother would be needed to support an online-deployment claim; we do not make one. Trajectories are smoothed using a parametric B-spline (scipy.splprep , cubic). Control points are selected greed-ily at a minimum spacing of 1 m; the smoothing parameter is set to s = n, where n is the number of control points, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS 7Video Processing Pipeline  

> Fig. 3. Traffic video is collected through fish-eye camera at a frame rate of 10 frames per second, and processed though a data processing pipeline that detects and tracks vehicles and pedestrians. The processed trajectories are mapped to the the Google Maps coordinates to generate final trajectories.

following the standard SciPy heuristic of one residual unit per knot. Each original observation is then projected to its nearest point on the densely sampled spline. Data is collected at a frame rate of 10 frames per second at a resolution of 

1280 × 960 pixels [36]. We use one hour of recorded data: the first 54 minutes are used for training and the final 6

minutes are held out for testing. Tables III and IV report per-leg vehicle arrival rates and the corresponding training and test split sizes. The data-processing pipeline uses thin-plate splines to map the fish-eye video into a rectangular ground frame, by matching the fish-eye image coordinates of lane centerlines to their corresponding Google Maps coordinates. Both vehicles and pedestrians are detected and tracked by the pipeline; pedestrian trajectories enter the model as neighbor context for nearby vehicles, but are not used as evaluation targets, consistent with the scope established in Section I. VI. E XPERIMENTS AND RESULTS : S IMULATOR REGIME 

We evaluate Enactor on the SUMO data of Section V-A in a closed-loop “simulation-in-the-loop” framework. After establishing the simulator results we report the corresponding real-world study in Section VII. 

Purpose of the simulator regime: The simulator regime is a controlled testbed for closed-loop learned actor dynamics, not a claim that Enactor should replace SUMO. We use it to test whether a learned model can stay stable and rule-aware when it has to control all dynamic vehicles over a continuously refreshing actor set against a ground truth that can be replayed — something the real-world data cannot offer, since each recording is a single realization of the world. The real-world study in Section VII then tests whether the same architecture can be trained and evaluated on naturalistic trajectories. 

A. Closed-Loop Evaluation Protocol 

SUMO generates vehicular traffic at a calibrated arrival rate and controls the signal phases. For each vehicle, the first few timesteps are governed by SUMO’s built-in car-following model. After this warm-start period, Enactor takes over and unrolls trajectories in closed loop for 40 ,000 steps ( 4,000 s).  

> Fig. 4. Lateral drift from detection error is corrected by fitting a smoothing spline to each actor’s trajectory and projecting the observed positions onto the spline.

During the rollout we simulate trajectories of 1,026 distinct actors, with roughly 7 concurrent at any given time and a mean residence time of about 28 seconds. 

A note on simulation speed: Simulation speed is not a focus of this paper, and we report no runtime numbers here; our claims concern actor-actor interaction realism, not rollout throughput. 

B. Metrics 

We use three groups of metrics: trajectory reconstruction, aggregate flow, and intersection-aware safety. 

Trajectory reconstruction: Trajectory reconstruction metrics compare the predicted trajectories against ground truth. We IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS 8                        

> Model NLL ADE @ 2s FDE @ 2s
> IntTrajSim -3.7 0.183 0.462 Enactor -7.12 0.137 0.279
> TABLE VI TRAJECTORY RECONSTRUCTION METRICS AT THE FIRST INTERSECTION .NLL IS COMPUTED UNDER EACH MODEL ’S OWN PREDICTED DISTRIBUTION AND IS NOT DIRECTLY COMPARABLE ACROSS MODELS ;ADE/FDE ARE THE PRIMARY CROSS -MODEL COMPARISON .
> Model NLL ADE @ 2s FDE @ 2s
> IntTrajSim -4.30 0.122 0.309 Enactor -7.17 0.128 0.269
> TABLE VII TRAJECTORY RECONSTRUCTION METRICS AT THE SECOND INTERSECTION . NLL IS COMPUTED UNDER EACH MODEL ’S OWN PREDICTED DISTRIBUTION AND IS NOT DIRECTLY COMPARABLE ACROSS MODELS ; ADE/FDE ARE THE PRIMARY CROSS -MODEL COMPARISON .

use ADE / FDE / NLL : average and final displacement error in Cartesian coordinates, and the negative log-likelihood of the ground-truth (s, α ) sequence under the model’s predicted distribution. Results are in Tables VI and VII for the two intersections. 

Intersection-aware safety:  

> •

Red-light violations: crossings of the stop bar during a red phase.  

> •

Mid-intersection low-speed event: speed of 8 kmph or less for 2 seconds inside the intersection box, outside of the warm-start period.  

> •

Pre-stopbar stoppage: stops more than a vehicle length before the stop bar on a green phase.  

> •

Unsafe Deceleration: timesteps with longitudinal De-celeration outside a physically plausible range of -0.47g (g = 9 .8 m /s2) 

> •

TTC events: time-to-collision events below a safety threshold of 1 second. 

Aggregate flow:  

> •

Average speed: mean and standard deviation of a Gaus-sian fit to the distribution of instantaneous vehicle speeds.  

> •

Average travel time: mean and standard deviation of travel times for vehicles traversing the intersection. 

C. Results: First Intersection 

We compare Enactor against the IntTrajSim baseline [30]. The story below has three parts that should be read together: aggregate-flow realism, where the model is strong; rule com-pliance, where it improves on the baseline once the leader-rear-bumper feature is included; and close-range interaction realism, which remains an open problem. 

Aggregate flow: On both speed and travel-time distri-butions, Enactor matches the ground-truth distributions sub-stantially more closely than the baseline (Tables IX and X). On travel time, KL divergence is reduced by over an order of magnitude; on speed, it is reduced by roughly 5×. The macroscopic distributions of vehicles produced by closed-loop rollout for 4,000 s are therefore close to those produced by SUMO itself.                                

> Model Red Light Viol. Mid-Int. Low-Speed Pre-Stopbar Stop. Unsafe Accel. TTC Event
> Raw SUMO 044 0032 IntTrajSim (vanilla) 175 030258 IntTrajSim (post-process) 169 1011 378 Enactor (no leader) 199 737 6577 Enactor 516 46366
> TABLE VIII INTERSECTION -AWARE SAFETY METRICS AT THE FIRST INTERSECTION .BOLD ENTRIES MARK THE BEST NON -BASELINE RESULT ;RAW SUMO IS SHOWN AS A REFERENCE FOR THE METRIC VALUES PRODUCED BY THE RULE -COMPLIANT SUMO BEHAVIOR MODELS THEMSELVES .

Rule compliance: Table VIII reports the intersection-aware safety metrics. We include an ablation, denoted “Enactor (no leader)”, that strips the leader rear-bumper feature from the actor’s input but is otherwise identical to Enactor. Without the feature, the model is worse than the baseline on stop-line and TTC metrics: 199 red-light violations and 577 TTC events versus 169 and 378 for the baseline. With the feature included, red-light violations fall to 5 and TTC events fall to 

366 , while the unsafe-acceleration count is unchanged. This is a meaningful gain on rule compliance specifically. The behavior of the ablation is consistent with a qualita-tive observation made during inspection: without an explicit geometric reference for the rear of the leading vehicle, the model decelerates appropriately when approaching a red signal or a leading vehicle but does not reliably stop at the correct location, instead overshooting the stop line or the rear of the leader. The leader rear-bumper feature provides exactly that geometric reference and is the single change with the largest effect on Table VIII. 

A note on baseline post-processing: IntTrajSim is re-ported in two configurations: a vanilla configuration that uses only the model’s raw predictions and a post-processed configuration that adds an explicit stop-line enforcement step. Enactor is reported without analogous post-processing. With its post-processing in place, IntTrajSim reaches 169 red-light violations and 378 TTC events at Site 1; with the post-processing removed, the same model reaches 175 red-light violations and 258 TTC events. The post-processing therefore makes only a small difference to the safety metrics for IntTrajSim. Under the same protocol, Enactor reduces red-light violations by more than an order of magnitude relative to either IntTrajSim configuration ( 5 vs. 169 /175 ), and we read the gap as a measure of relative safety realism within the closed-loop regime that both models occupy. 

Close-range interaction realism remains limited: Even with the leader-rear-bumper feature, the TTC count remains higher than the count obtained from raw SUMO data, indicat-ing that close-range interactions are not yet modeled at full fidelity. We name this as the principal remaining limitation of the model and return to it in Section VIII. 

D. Results: Second Intersection 

We evaluate Enactor on a second intersection geometry, in which the middle through-lanes for the eastbound and westbound approaches are removed. The model is trained from IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS 9                                    

> Model Mean (m/s) Std. Dev. (m/s) KL Divergence
> Ground Truth 2.82 3.77 -IntTrajSim (vanilla) 4.81 3.89 0.1318 IntTrajSim (post-process) 3.28 3.54 0.0112 Enactor (no leader) 2.87 3.59 0.0024
> Enactor 2.68 3.49 0.0063
> TABLE IX SPEED -DISTRIBUTION STATISTICS AT THE FIRST INTERSECTION .
> Model Mean (s) Std. Dev. (s) KL Divergence
> Ground Truth 28.19 16.26 -IntTrajSim (vanilla) 16.31 13.93 0.28854 IntTrajSim (post-process) 23.92 17.53 0.04043 Enactor (no leader) 27.24 16.03 0.00190 Enactor 28.78 16.53 0.00093
> TABLE X TRAVEL -TIME STATISTICS AT THE FIRST INTERSECTION .

scratch on data collected from this geometry and evaluated under the same closed-loop protocol used for the first inter-section. The aggregate-flow picture mirrors Site 1: Enactor matches the travel-time distribution much more closely than IntTrajSim (Table XII), and its speed mean and standard deviation are closer to ground truth (Table XIII). Safety results are mixed in absolute terms but clear relative to the baseline: Enactor has 1

red-light violation, 82 mid-intersection low-speed events, and 

534 TTC events, against IntTrajSim’s 278 , 234 , and 794 under the same protocol (Table XI). Both IntTrajSim and Enactor are trained from scratch on Site 2 data using the same protocol as at Site 1. Both sustain the 4,000 -second rollout against the dynamic-actor cohort at the modified geometry, so the comparison again measures relative safety realism rather than gross stability. Enactor’s 534 TTC events are still well above the raw-SUMO reference of 42 , so close-range interaction realism remains the main limitation — just less severe than the baseline’s. One regression is specific to the modified geometry: mid-intersection low-speed events rise from 16 at Site 1 to 82 

at Site 2. Removing the middle through-lanes on the east–west approaches compresses east- and westbound flow into a single through-lane each, and our inspection suggests that Enactor keeps red-light compliance but accelerates more slowly than the ground truth when the signal turns from red to green. That slow movement inside the intersection box is what the metric captures. The phenomenon is more visible at Site 2 because of the queueing dynamics that arise under this lane compression. The failure mode is distinct from red-light violation and points to lane-occupancy or queue-state features as a candidate input for future work. VII. E XPERIMENTS AND RESULTS : R EAL -W ORLD REGIME 

The real-world setting differs from the simulator in two ways that shape the experimental design. First, each segment of the recording captures a single realization of the world. There is no equivalent to running multiple SUMO seeds, and no ground-truth alternative future to compare a closed-loop rollout against. Second, the input trajectories are noisy estimates of the true motion, run through the preprocessing of Section V-B; the evaluation therefore folds in the residual error                             

> Model Red Light Viol. Mid-Int. Low-Speed Pre-Stopbar Stop. Unsafe Accel. TTC Event
> Raw SUMO 041 3042 IntTrajSim 278 234 00794 Enactor 182 20 4534
> TABLE XI INTERSECTION -AWARE SAFETY METRICS AT THE SECOND INTERSECTION .
> Model Mean (s) Std. Dev. (s) KL Divergence
> Ground Truth 32.31 20.60 -IntTrajSim 22.35 21.72 0.11895 Enactor 33.38 20.01 0.00217
> TABLE XII TRAVEL -TIME STATISTICS AT THE SECOND INTERSECTION .

of that preprocessing. Both push us away from long closed-loop rollouts and toward shorter, single-pass prediction. 

A. Real-World Evaluation Protocol 

We split the recording chronologically into a 90 /10 train-ing/test split by total time; the per-segment actor counts and durations are reported in Table IV. On the evaluation segment, the model receives a context of H raw observed timesteps and predicts the next F timesteps for every actor present at the prompt time. Both Enactor-Smooth and Enactor-Raw use the same raw history at test time and predict against the same raw target trajectory; the two variants differ only in whether the training trajectories were spline-smoothed. Predictions are made in a single forward pass per actor; we do not attempt a multi-actor closed-loop rollout, because there is no ground-truth scene against which to compare it. The procedure is repeated across multiple prompt times spanning the held-out segment. For the evaluation step above, we first identify vehicles whose trajectories are present for the past H steps and the next 

F timesteps. We score only mapped trajectories; unmapped vehicles enter only as neighbors during spatial-embedding computation, consistent with the vehicle-centric scope of this paper. The number of valid evaluation samples is 60 ,472 at the 

2-second prediction horizon, 48 ,597 at 5 seconds, and 41 ,802 

at 10 seconds. Because prompts are generated at overlapping timesteps within each actor’s track, these counts should be interpreted as prediction instances rather than as statistically independent trajectories. 

B. Metrics 

The single-pass setting calls for a different metric set, focused on the predictive distribution at a few horizons:  

> •

Multi-horizon FDE: ℓ2 distance between predicted and ground-truth positions at t + 2 s, t + 5 s, and t + 10 safter the prompt.  

> •

Multi-horizon ADE: ℓ2 distance averaged over the pre-diction window up to each horizon.  

> •

Within-threshold success rates: the fraction of pre-dictions within distance thresholds appropriate to each horizon. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS 10              

> Model Mean (m/s) Std. Dev. (m/s) KL Divergence
> Ground Truth 2.52 3.69 –IntTrajSim 3.52 3.85 0.0385 Enactor 2.35 3.29 0.0132
> TABLE XIII SPEED -DISTRIBUTION STATISTICS AT THE SECOND INTERSECTION .
> Fig. 5. Trajectory comparison between enactor and constant velocity baseline. Prediction Horizon is 10 seconds.
> •

Vehicle-only evaluation: all real-world metrics are re-ported for mapped vehicle trajectories. Pedestrians are used only as contextual neighbors. 

Constant-velocity baselines: We compare against three versions of a constant-velocity baseline, each extrapolating lin-early in the metric ground frame from the prompt-time position but estimating velocity over a different window of past history. 

CV (last 1) uses the two-frame finite difference between the last two observed positions: vt = ( pt − pt−1)/∆frame . CV (avg 10 ) averages the per-frame finite-difference velocities over the final 10 observed frames ( 1.0 s at 10 fps). CV (ls 10 )

fits a least-squares line to the final 10 observed positions and uses its slope. The absolute measure of the velocity is kept constant and the head angle is derived from nearest lane center lines that the vehicle traverses. Reporting all three windows shows that Enactor’s advantage is not an artifact of picking the noisiest baseline: the more aggressive ls 10 variant closes much of the gap to the naive last 1 at longer horizons, but Enactor still outperforms it at every horizon evaluated. 

C. Results 

Tables XV–XIV report Enactor’s multi-horizon FDE and ADE on the held-out real-world segment, alongside the three constant-velocity baselines (CV last 1, CV avg 10 , CV ls 10 ). The real-world section uses only constant-velocity baselines: the IntTrajSim baseline from the simulator regime was not trained or evaluated on real-world data. We report both Enactor-Smooth and Enactor-Raw because whether spline smoothing of the training input actually helps is itself the experimental question motivated in Section V-B. Both variants are evaluated against the same held-out raw target trajectories; only the training-input preprocessing differs. Thus the compar-ison should be read as a training-preprocessing ablation, not as a comparison of online smoothing pipelines. Both beat every constant-velocity baseline at every horizon: Enactor-Smooth has FDE 0.76 , 1.43 , and 2.45 m at 2, 5, and 10 seconds; Enactor-Raw has FDE 0.83 , 1.28 , and 2.04 m; the strongest constant-velocity baseline (CV ls 10 ) reaches 0.96 , 2.45 ,and 3.61 m. The gap is largest at longer horizons, where constant velocity cannot extrapolate curved trajectories, but Enactor’s improvement is consistent across both variants and all three CV references. Among the constant-velocity variants, CV avg 10 has slightly lower ADE/FDE than CV last 1 but worse within-threshold rates: mean displacement and threshold success measure different parts of the error distribution, and a smoother velocity estimate can lower the mean while pushing more of the error mass just outside the success threshold. 

Smoothing trade-off across horizons: Comparing Enactor-Smooth and Enactor-Raw in Tables XV and XIV, Enactor-Smooth has the edge at the 2-second horizon (FDE@ 2 s: 0.76 vs. 0.83 m; ADE@ 2 s: 0.39 vs. 0.44 m). At longer horizons the two variants are close on average error: ADE is identical at 5 s ( 0.68 vs. 0.68 m) and within 10% 

at 10 s ( 1.00 vs. 1.09 m). FDE separates more, in favor of Enactor-Raw ( 1.28 vs. 1.43 m at 5 s, 2.04 vs. 2.45 m at 

10 s), and within-threshold success rates (Table XVI) favor Enactor-Raw at every horizon. The pattern is consistent with a low-pass filter on the input: filtering removes centroid jitter the model should not have to fit, which helps at short horizons, while the small bias smoothing introduces in the estimated current state matters more as the prediction window lengthens. We use Enactor-Smooth as the default at 2 seconds and Enactor-Raw as the default at 5 and 10 seconds, with the caveat that the long-horizon gap is modest on average error. We treat displacement metrics (Tables XV, XIV) and within-threshold success rates (Table XVI) as the primary real-world measures. 

Within-threshold rates: Table XVI reports within-threshold success rates for both variants. Enactor-Smooth reaches 77 .42% , 84 .74% , and 88 .49% within 1 m at 2 s, 2 m at 

5 s, and 4 m at 10 s respectively; Enactor-Raw reaches 78 .04% ,

87 .14% , and 92 .98% at the same thresholds, again favoring Enactor-Raw at the longer horizons. Both Enactor variants substantially exceed the three constant-velocity baselines at every horizon (the strongest CV variant, ls 10 , reaches 72 .10% ,

78 .23% , 81 .80% ). IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS 11                   

> Model ADE @ 2 s (m) ADE @ 5 s (m) ADE @ 10 s (m)
> Constant-velocity (last 1) 0.58 1.24 1.83 Constant-velocity (avg 10) 0.55 1.23 1.79 Constant-velocity (ls 10) 0.46 0.97 1.23 Enactor-Raw 0.44 0.68 1.00 Enactor-Smooth 0.39 0.68 1.09

TABLE XIV MULTI -HORIZON AVERAGE DISPLACEMENT ERROR ON REAL -WORLD DATA (METERS ).                   

> Model FDE @ 2 s (m) FDE @ 5 s (m) FDE @ 10 s (m)
> Constant-velocity (last 1) 1.16 2.92 4.70 Constant-velocity (avg 10) 1.12 2.90 4.61 Constant-velocity (ls 10) 0.96 2.45 3.61 Enactor-Raw 0.83 1.28 2.04 Enactor-Smooth 0.76 1.43 2.45

TABLE XV MULTI -HORIZON FINAL DISPLACEMENT ERROR ON REAL -WORLD DATA 

(METERS ). 

VIII. C ONCLUSIONS 

We have presented Enactor, a transformer-based generative model for closed-loop microsimulation of signalized traffic in-tersections. In the simulator regime, the polar-coordinate state representation and the closed-loop training schedule give a model whose macroscopic speed and travel-time distributions match those of SUMO itself, with KL divergence well below that of a recent transformer-based baseline (over an order of magnitude lower on travel time at both intersections, and roughly 5× lower on speed at Site 1). Enactor also improves on the same baseline on most trajectory-reconstruction metrics at both intersections (FDE at Site 1 and Site 2; ADE at Site 1, while ADE at Site 2 is comparable). On safety metrics, Enactor reduces red-light violations by more than an order of magnitude relative to IntTrajSim at both intersections. The defining feature of the evaluation is that the actor cohort evolves over the rollout: actors enter on one approach, traverse the intersection, leave on another, and new actors arrive continuously at the perimeter. Sustaining a stable rollout of thousands of seconds against this non-stationary set, rather than against a fixed cohort at a fixed prompt time, is what dis-tinguishes a microsimulator from a trajectory predictor, and is the setting Enactor is evaluated in. We have argued that stable long-horizon rollout, aggregate-flow realism, and intersection-aware safety realism are distinct objectives: the polar repre-sentation and closed-loop curriculum address the first two; the leader rear-bumper feature is the single change with the largest effect on the third, reducing red-light violations and TTC events relative to a base variant without it. Across the two intersection geometries, aggregate-flow performance is consistent and red-light compliance is preserved, while TTC remains a limitation. Close-range interaction realism is the main remaining limitation of the current model. For the real-world setting, we have shown that the same architecture can be trained and evaluated on naturalistic tra-jectories from a fish-eye camera processed by a YOLO-based detection-and-tracking system, with appropriate preprocessing and a single-pass evaluation protocol that fits the record-ing. Both Enactor-Smooth and Enactor-Raw beat a constant-velocity baseline at every horizon evaluated. Enactor-Smooth                 

> Model Within 1 m @ 2 s Within 2 m @ 5 s Within 4 m @ 10 s
> Constant velocity (last 1) 69.96% 75.88% 79.21% Constant velocity (avg 10) 66.28% 70.31% 73.71% Constant velocity (ls 10) 72.10% 78.23% 81.80% Enactor-Raw 78.04% 87.14% 92.98% Enactor-Smooth 77.42% 84.74% 88.49%

TABLE XVI WITHIN -THRESHOLD SUCCESS RATES AT MULTIPLE HORIZONS ON REAL -WORLD DATA . E ACH PERCENTAGE IS THE FRACTION OF EVALUATION SAMPLES WHOSE PREDICTED POSITION LIES WITHIN THE INDICATED THRESHOLD OF GROUND TRUTH . T HE DENOMINATOR IS THE NUMBER OF VALID EVALUATION SAMPLES AT THE CORRESPONDING HORIZON (N = 60 ,472 AT 2 S, N = 48 ,597 AT 5 S, N = 41 ,802 AT 10 S). RESULTS ARE REPORTED ON VEHICLES ONLY ; PEDESTRIANS ARE OUT OF THE SCOPE OF THIS EVALUATION (SEE SECTION I). 

has a small edge at 2 seconds; at longer horizons the two variants are close on average error, with Enactor-Raw retaining a modest advantage on FDE and within-threshold success — the behavior one would expect from a low-pass filter as the prediction horizon varies. Within-threshold success rates of 77 –93% at 1–4 m thresholds across 2–10 s horizons (Table XVI) suggest the predictions are accurate enough for offline trajectory analysis and microsimulation-calibration workflows; online deployment would require a causal prepro-cessing pipeline and broader field validation. A qualitative comparison of predictions across a range of trajectory types is the next step. The methodological lesson on the real-world side: upstream tracking noise affects the learned dynamics. Smoothing can suppress short-horizon jitter but may introduce bias that matters at longer horizons. Future work will target close-range interaction realism (the TTC regime) directly, through architectural changes that address it head-on; extend the real-world deployment to multiple cameras and longer recordings, so we can evaluate against rare and safety-critical events that a single hour of data does not cover; explore transfer-learning strategies that adapt weights trained at one intersection to new geometries without full retraining; and extend the actor-centric formulation to treat pedestrian behavior as a first-class target rather than context. REFERENCES [1] Y. Ranjan, R. Sengupta, A. Rangarajan, and S. Ranka, “Enactor: From traffic simulators to surrogate world models,” in Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Vehicle Technology and Intelligent Transport Systems - VEHITS , INSTICC. SciTePress, 2026, pp. 430– 438. [2] D. Ni, “Limitations of current traffic models and strategies to address them,” Simulation Modelling Practice and Theory , vol. 104, p. 102137, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/ science/article/pii/S1569190X20300769 [3] T. Salzmann, B. Ivanovic, P. Chakravarty, and M. Pavone, “Trajectron++: Dynamically-feasible trajectory forecasting with heterogeneous data,” 2021. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2001.03093 [4] S. Shi, L. Jiang, D. Dai, and B. Schiele, “Motion transformer with global intention localization and local movement refinement,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.13508 [5] L. Zhang, J. Gao, W. Li et al. , “Trafficbots: Towards world models for autonomous driving simulation and motion prediction,” in IEEE Intl. Conf. on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 2023. [6] A. Alahi, K. Goel, V. Ramanathan, A. Robicquet, L. Fei-Fei, and S. Savarese, “Social LSTM: Human trajectory prediction in crowded spaces,” in IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-tion (CVPR) , 2016, pp. 961–971. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS 12 

[7] N. Deo and M. M. Trivedi, “Convolutional social pooling for vehicle trajectory prediction,” in IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops (CVPRW) , 2018, pp. 1468–1476. [8] A. Gupta, J. Johnson, L. Fei-Fei, S. Savarese, and A. Alahi, “Social GAN: Socially acceptable trajectories with generative adversarial net-works,” in IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-tion (CVPR) , 2018, pp. 2255–2264. [9] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez, L. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2017. [10] K. Messaoud, I. Yahiaoui, A. Verroust-Blondet, and F. Nashashibi, “Attention based vehicle trajectory prediction,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Vehicles , vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 175–185, Mar. 2021. [11] K. Zhang, L. Zhao, C. Dong, L. Wu, and L. Zheng, “AI-TP: Attention-based interaction-aware trajectory prediction for autonomous driving,” 

IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Vehicles , vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 73–83, Jan. 2023. [12] X. Chen, H. Zhang, F. Zhao, Y. Hu, C. Tan, and J. Yang, “Intention-aware vehicle trajectory prediction based on spatial-temporal dynamic attention network for internet of vehicles,” IEEE Transactions on Intel-ligent Transportation Systems , vol. 23, no. 10, pp. 19 471–19 483, Oct. 2022. [13] M. Geng, J. Li, C. Li, N. Xie, X. Chen, and D.-H. Lee, “Adaptive and simultaneous trajectory prediction for heterogeneous agents via transferable hierarchical transformer network,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems , vol. 24, no. 10, pp. 11 479–11 492, Oct. 2023. [14] X. Jia, P. Wu, L. Chen et al. , “Hdgt: Heterogeneous driving graph transformer for multi-agent trajectory prediction via scene encoding,” 

IEEE Trans. on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence (TPAMI) ,2023. [15] X. Chen, L. Zhou, and L. Li, “Bayesian network for red-light-running prediction at signalized intersections,” Journal of Intelligent Transporta-tion Systems , vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 120–132, Mar. 2019. [16] T. Zhang, W. Song, M. Fu, Y. Yang, and M. Wang, “Vehicle motion prediction at intersections based on the turning intention and prior trajectories model,” IEEE/CAA Journal of Automatica Sinica , vol. 8, no. 10, pp. 1657–1666, Oct. 2021. [17] Z. Yang, R. Zhang, G. Pandey, N. Masoud, and H. X. Liu, “A hierarchical vehicle behavior prediction framework with traffic signals and interactive agents,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems , vol. 24, no. 10, pp. 11 066–11 079, Oct. 2023. [18] G. Oh and H. Peng, “Impact of traffic lights on trajectory forecasting of human-driven vehicles near signalized intersections,” 2019. [19] Y. Zhang, W. Wang, W. Guo, P. Lv, M. Xu, W. Chen, and D. Manocha, “D2-TPred: Discontinuous dependency for trajectory prediction under traffic lights,” in European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) ,2022, pp. 522–539. [20] C. Wei, L. Zhang, W. Li et al. , “Ki-gan: Knowledge-informed generative adversarial networks for vehicle trajectory prediction at signalized intersections,” in IEEE/CVF Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops (CVPRW) , 2024. [21] V. Trentin, A. Artu˜ nedo, J. Godoy, and J. Villagra, “Multi-modal interaction-aware motion prediction at unsignalized intersections,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Vehicles , vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 3349–3365, May 2023. [22] Y. Sun, T. Xu, J. Li, Y. Chu, and X. Ji, “MMH-STA: A macro-micro-hierarchical spatio-temporal attention method for multi-agent trajectory prediction in unsignalized roundabouts,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicu-lar Technology , vol. 72, no. 9, pp. 11 237–11 250, Sep. 2023. [23] D. Roy, T. Ishizaka, C. K. Mohan, and A. Fukuda, “Vehicle trajectory prediction at intersections using interaction based generative adversar-ial networks,” in IEEE Intelligent Transportation Systems Conference (ITSC) , Auckland, New Zealand, 2019, pp. 2318–2323. [24] A. Wu, Y. Ranjan, R. Sengupta, A. Rangarajan, and S. Ranka, “A data-driven approach for probabilistic traffic prediction and simulation at signalized intersections,” in 2024 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV) , 2024, pp. 3092–3099. [25] S. Ettinger, A. Timofeev, M. Krivokon, A. Gao, A. Joshi, Y. Zhang, J. Shlens, and D. Anguelov, “Large scale interactive motion forecasting for autonomous driving: The waymo open motion dataset,” in Proceed-ings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , 2021, pp. 4378–4387. [26] X. Wang, D. Wang, L. Chen, and Y. Lin, “Building transportation foundation model via generative graph transformer,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.14826 [27] Y. Zhang, X. Chen, Y. Liu et al. , “Transworldng: Traffic simulation via foundation model,” in IEEE Intl. Conf. on Smart Computing (SMART-COMP) , 2023. [28] S. Tan, J. Lambert, H. Jeon, S. Kulshrestha, Y. Bai, J. Luo, D. Anguelov, M. Tan, and C. M. Jiang, “Scenediffuser++: City-scale traffic simulation via a generative world model,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.21976 [29] K. Zheng, J. Gao, W. Li et al. , “Beyond simulation: Benchmarking world models for planning and causality in autonomous driving,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.01922 , 2025. [30] Y. Ranjan, R. Sengupta, A. Rangarajan, and S. Ranka, “Inttrajsim: Trajectory prediction for simulating multi-vehicle driving at signalized intersections,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2506. 08957 [31] ——, “Evaluating generative vehicle trajectory models for nbsp;traffic intersection dynamics,” in Data Science: Foundations and Applications: 29th Pacific-Asia Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, PAKDD 2025, Sydney, NSW, Australia, June 10-13, 2025, Proceedings, Part VI . Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 2025, p. 262–274. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-96-8295-9 19 [32] A. Kuncheria, J. L. Walker, and J. Macfarlane, “Beyond centrality: Understanding urban street network typologies through intersection patterns,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.06747 [33] N. Montali, J. Lambert, P. Mougin, A. Kuefler, N. Rhinehart, M. Li, C. Gulino, T. Emrich, Z. Yang, S. Whiteson, B. White, and D. Anguelov, “The waymo open sim agents challenge,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.12032 [34] B. Zhang, N. Song, B. Gao, and L. Zhang, “Relative position matters: Trajectory prediction and planning with polar representation,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.11492 [35] J. Gao, C. Sun, H. Zhao, Y. Shen, D. Anguelov, C. Li, and C. Schmid, “Vectornet: Encoding hd maps and agent dynamics from vectorized representation,” 2020. [Online]. Available: https: //arxiv.org/abs/2005.04259 [36] X. Huang, P. He, A. Rangarajan, and S. Ranka, “Machine-learning-based real-time multi-camera vehicle tracking and travel-time estimation,” 

Journal of Imaging , vol. 8, no. 4, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/2313-433X/8/4/101 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS 13 (a): Prediction Horizon 20 (2 s) 

(b): Prediction Horizon 50 (5 s) (c): Prediction Horizon 100 (10 s) 

Fig. 6. Trajectory comparison between enactor and constant velocity baselines with different prediction horizons.