Title: OmniV2X: A Generative Foundation Planner for Efficient End-to-End Cooperative Driving

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.21165v1

Published Time: Tue, 23 Jun 2026 00:37:35 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# OmniV2X: A Generative Foundation Planner for Efficient End-to-End Cooperative Driving 

Juntong Peng, Juanwu Lu, Yupeng Zhou, Can Cui, Yaobin Chen, Ziran Wang 

Abstract — We present OmniV2X , a generative foundation model for vehicle-to-everything (V2X) cooperative driving. The model directly interprets independent context sequences comprising multi-modal and multi-agent observations. The new design mitigates the computational cost of dense 3D perception, the vulnerability to data scarcity in cooperative scenarios, and the poor compliance with standardized messag-ing in existing methods that fuse multi-modal inputs into a shared representation. For training, we present an end-to-end supervised pipeline using a downstream trajectory generation loss, in which a high-capacity generative sequence planner implicitly learns to steer the model and leverage multi-modal inputs via cross-attention injection. As a foundation model, we demonstrate that OmniV2X pre-trained on large-scale single-agent planning datasets can efficiently adapt to cooperative environments by integrating the conditioning context with lightweight, standard-compliant V2X tokens. Evaluated on the DAIR-V2X-Seq dataset, OmniV2X outperforms existing end-to-end cooperative driving baselines, achieving state-of-the-art performance with less than 10% of the fine-tune V2X dataset and less than 1% of the communication bandwidth. We conduct comprehensive evaluations to demonstrate its computational efficiency and robustness under real-world constraints. 

I. INTRODUCTION End-to-end (E2E) autonomous driving is evolving rapidly, yet single-vehicle systems remain fundamentally constrained by ego-centric perception. Cooperative driving with vehicle-to-everything (V2X) communications promises to overcome physical occlusions in single-vehicle perception by extending the perception range through the sharing of infrastructure perspectives. Pioneering works such as UniV2X [1] and UniMM-V2X [2] demonstrate the benefits of E2E cooper-ative driving by feature-based fusion at both the perception and prediction levels. However, real-world deployments of these methods encounter several systemic bottlenecks. Trans-mitting bird’s-eye view (BEV) features requires substantial communication bandwidth, and the unique feature spaces across different models hinder standardization and cross-model sharing among connected and automated vehicles (CAVs). Furthermore, aligning multi-agent features onto a shared spatial grid tightly couples the ego and infrastructure pipelines, requiring exhaustive 3D bounding-box supervision on temporally synchronized datasets. While there is an in-creasing number of perception-label-free ego-centric driving datasets and benchmarks in both scale and diversity [3], [4], real-world cooperative datasets [5] remain limited due to the high cost of equipping infrastructure and synchronizing                   

> The authors are with the College of Engineering, Purdue Univer-sity, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA. Corresponding author: Juntong Peng

juntong@purdue.edu .

Fig. 1: Top: Comparison among different paradigm in end-to-end cooperative driving. Bottom: OmniV2X successfully provides low latency, low communication bandwidth, and a reasonable number of parameters. 

across sources. Therefore, it requires a disruptive paradigm shift to enable the effective use of multi-modal V2X inputs. To address these limitations, we propose shifting the focus of cooperative driving from rigid spatial feature fusion to conditional generative sequence modeling. We introduce Om-niV2X , a scalable framework for E2E Cooperative Driv-ing. OmniV2X treats the ego-centric sensor input, potential infrastructure-sourced information, and other auxiliary ob-servations as condition tokens for future waypoint genera-tion. Rather than explicitly merging features from different sources into a shared representation, OmniV2X presents heterogeneous, multi-agent inputs to the generative planner as independent context sequences. Primarily supervised by a downstream trajectory-generation loss, the generative planner implicitly learns to extract and utilize these distinct modali-ties on its own. Pre-trained on large-scale ego-only datasets, the learned generative driving prior can be readily adapted to cooperative inputs and novel environments with only a minimal amount of target data. Our main contributions are as follows:  

> •

A Scalable V2X Cooperative Driving Framework. 

OmniV2X bypasses rigid spatial-temporal fusion of multi-agent perceptual features, learning directly from the downstream planning task. This design treats hetero-

> arXiv:2606.21165v1 [cs.RO] 19 Jun 2026

geneous inputs as independent context sequences, en-abling seamless integration of SAE-standard-compliant V2X messages.  

> •

Data-Efficient Ego-to-V2X Knowledge Transfer. Om-niV2X bridges the real-world cooperative data gap by leveraging a domain-stable feature space to transfer knowledge from single-agent driving. The pre-trained model achieves significant optimization acceleration, surpassing from-scratch multi-agent baselines using less than 10% of the target V2X data.  

> •

Inference-Efficient End-to-end Cooperative Driving. 

The standardized V2X messages only consume com-munication bandwidth less than 1.4kBPS . Moreover, with the design of fully BEV-free processing, OmniV2X 

removes expensive feature encoding on dense spatial grids, thereby becoming highly efficient and requiring only 550 MB GPU memory during inference, with an inference latency of 35 ms . 

> •

Comprehensive Evaluation & Field Testing. Om-niV2X outperforms heavily-supervised fusion architec-tures at real-time speeds, while requiring less than 1% of the communication bandwidth of current baselines on the DAIR-V2X dataset. Extensive ablation studies sys-tematically assess how pretraining benefits cooperative driving. We also validate the performance of OmniV2X 

against real-world challenges through various noise-injection tests and V2X-augmented field tests. 1

II. RELATED WORK 

A. End-to-End Autonomous Driving 

The paradigm of autonomous driving is evolving from modular systems, which suffer from compounding errors, to E2E architectures that directly map sensor inputs to planning trajectories or control commands. Pioneering works such as UniAD [6] demonstrated that jointly optimizing perception and planning in a shared Bird’s-Eye View (BEV) space sig-nificantly improves planning performance. Moreover, VAD [7], Hydra-MDP [8], and SparseDrive [9] showed that sparse instance-level or query-based representations could reduce the computational overhead of dense BEV grids. Extend-ing beyond deterministic heads, recent approaches, such as GenAD [10] and DiffusionDrive [11], leverage continuous generative models to refine target waypoints from anchored trajectory candidates. However, all these single-agent sys-tems remain bounded by the physical limitations of ego-centric perception. In complex urban environments, onboard cameras are heavily constrained by line-of-sight occlusions. 

B. Language Foundation Models for Autonomous Driving 

Driven by the success of large language models (LLMs) and vision-language models (VLMs), recent works increas-ingly adapt language foundation models for E2E driving [12]–[14]. Leveraging their broad reasoning capabilities, methods such as Alpamayo-R1 [15] and ReCogDrive [16]       

> 1The code will be available at: https://github.com/ JuntongPeng/OmniV2X .

successfully integrate semantic understanding with continu-ous trajectory generation. Deploying these high-capacity models on resource-constrained vehicles, however, remains a critical challenge. While techniques like masked decoding [17] and struc-tured chain-of-thought [18] accelerate discrete text decod-ing, adapting these language-native architectures to driving exposes three structural bottlenecks: the massive compute overhead of billion-parameter weights, a representational mismatch between discrete tokens and continuous kinemat-ics, and prohibitive memory scaling when processing increas-ing contexts. Consequently, real-time autonomous driving requires shifting from language-centric architectures to a 

generative foundation planner natively optimized for con-tinuous spatial sequences. 

C. Cooperative Driving with V2X Communications 

V2X communications mitigate the physical occlusion lim-its of ego-centric perception. Early systems established the paradigm of intermediate feature fusion, projecting multi-agent data into shared spatial grids for co-perception and cooperative planning [19]–[21]. Recently, E2E architectures such as UniV2X [1] and UniMM-V2X [2] have successfully extended the BEV fusion paradigm to tracking, prediction, and trajectory planning. However, existing feature-based methods require rigid alignment of feature spaces among collaborators. This limitation significantly hinders the de-ployment of V2X cooperative driving in real-world scenarios. Recent methods such as V2X-VLM [22], Lang-Coop [23], and CoLMDriver [24] use natural language as the universal message. While these language-based methods are beneficial for long-term decision-making, the latency incurred by multi-round LLM inference makes them impractical for safety-critical short-term planning. To address the alignment challenge of feature-based fusion and the inference latency of language models, OmniV2X 

formulates cooperative driving as a continuous conditional sequence generation task that incorporates context informa-tion from multiple sources. By representing heterogeneous multi-agent inputs as independent context sequences and processing them via cross-attention injection, our generative foundation planner can consume SAE-compliant V2X mes-sages and overcome quadratic memory bottlenecks, thereby enabling real-time, safety-critical V2X autonomy. III. METHODOLOGY This section introduces the formulation and architectural design of OmniV2X . We reframe E2E cooperative driving as a multi-input conditional sequence generation problem, shifting away from recent methods extended from BEV-based perception [1], [2], [25], [26]. As illustrated in Fig. 2, our framework achieves this through three primary compo-nents: (1) independent modules transforming heterogeneous inputs, including ego-centric visual features, infrastructure V2X messages, and high-level navigational commands into the unified conditioning sequence consumed by the plan-ner; (2) a generative foundation model serving as the core Fig. 2: The OmniV2X architecture. All modalities are independently encoded and normalized, then concatenated into a unified context sequence, which is consumed by a generative planner via computationally efficient cross-attention. The model is first pretrained on a large-scale single-agent dataset and adapted to a smaller-scale V2X dataset. planning engine, optimized for the long-context conditions from different sources via cross-attention injection; and (3) a perception-label-free training pipeline including ego-centric driving pretraining and V2X cooperative driving fine-tuning. We detail these components in the following. 

A. Independent Modules for Context Tokenization 

To construct the unified context sequence C required by the conditional generative planner, OmniV2X encodes each input modality through an independent neural network module to a unified D-dimensional hidden space. 

1) Projection-Free Visual Context: A critical computa-tional bottleneck in intermediate BEV fusion is the reliance on rigid perspective projections ( e.g., view transformers ) to explicitly map 2D image pixels to 3D coordinates. Although this projection benefits precise 3D perception, tracking, and prediction, it incurs substantial computational cost in dense 3D space. As an alternative, our generative planner learns to implicitly map the latent 2D visual sequence directly to continuous kinematic displacements. We extract visual context from the front-view camera using a pretrained vision backbone as the primary condition for future waypoint planning. Crucially, to ensure a stable feature space across multiple datasets, the backbone is kept completely frozen throughout training and serves as a general-purpose visual feature ex-tractor. A single trainable linear projection layer then extracts visual patch tokens directly to the hidden dimension D,forming the front-view visual context CFV . The downstream generative planner, as we will describe in Sec. III-B, will learn to use these general-purpose image features to yield safe and efficient planning results entirely from minimizing the waypoints loss. The visual patch tokens from two con-secutive frames are concatenated along the sequence length dimension to provide implicit temporal motion cues. 

2) High-level Navigation Context: To define the ego-agent’s intent, an independent module constructs the token sequence Cnav . We encode high-level navigation commands (e.g., Turn Left, Go Straight ) through learned embeddings. The structure of navigation commands follows the practice of previous work [2]. Notably, ego-status, such as current speed, throttle, and steering, is excluded to prevent the generative planner from exploiting kinematic modelling as a shortcut, in which the model learns a trivial policy of simply extrapolat-ing its current velocity rather than actively reasoning about the dynamic visual and cooperative environment. 

3) SAE-Compliant V2X Infrastructure Context: To facili-tate the use of real-world communication standards in E2E cooperative driving, infrastructure data is treated as instance-level context. While OmniV2X eliminates the need for rigid camera calibration to build a BEV representation, multi-agent cooperation still necessitates basic spatial alignment. Herein, we assume the Roadside Unit (RSU) relies on an arbitrary detector to broadcast detected objects in a global coordinate system. The ego-vehicle utilizes its onboard localization (GNSS) to transform these states into its local coordinate frame. For each infrastructure-detected object, a 13 -dimensional state vector is decoded from the Sensor Data Sharing Mes-sage (SDSM) following the definition in SAE-J3224 [27]: 

vobj = [ x, y, z, l, w, h, sin θ, cos θ, v x, v y , c veh , c ped , c cyc ] (1) where c represents one-hot class encodings. The orientation is encoded continuously via [sin θ, cos θ] to prevent angular wrapping discontinuities. Furthermore, optional map infor-mation can also be decoded similarly from the MAP mes-sage [28]. These vectors, combining infrastructure-detected objects and maps, are encoded by a lightweight Transformer to form the infrastructure context Cv2x .

4) Context Alignment and Sequence Concatenation: Be-cause visual patches and infrastructure-sourced bounding boxes possess extremely different numerical scales, concate-nating them directly can lead to modality collapse. To prevent visual features from dominating others, each modality is independently normalized using Layer Normalization (LN). A learnable additive Modality Embedding is added to distin-guish different data sources. The final conditioning sequence 

C is formally constructed via sequence concatenation:          

> C=LN (CFV ) + SFV ∥LN (Cnav ) + Snav ∥LN (Cv2x ) + Sv2x
> 

(2) (where ∥ denotes sequence concatenation along the sequence length dimension and S∗ denotes an additive learnable seg-ment embedding.) 

B. Generative Foundation Model for Efficient Conditional Waypoint Generation 

Following the first architectural component, we formulate cooperative trajectory planning as a conditional generative sequence task. While our tokenized interface by design supports various sequence backbones, including one-shot, autoregressive, and iterative-refinement decoders, we build our primary foundation model using a Rectified Flow Trans-former. 

1) Continuous Displacement Generation via Rectified Flow: Rather than regressing absolute coordinates (even within the ego-centric coordinate frame), which introduces spurious spatial correlations between static context infor-mation and the generation outputs, we use the step-wise positional displacements as generation targets. We find the design crucial to avoid the potential shortcut learning of simply memorizing routes at specific physical intersections during the cooperative fine-tuning stage, especially when vectorized maps exist. We observe that, under an identical hyperparameter, using waypoints as the generation target leads to a severe over-fitting issue, and the best L2 error is 57% worse than the displacements generation counterpart. During training, we define a vector field vθ (Xτ , τ, C)

directing noisy samples Xτ back to the ground-truth tra-jectory X1, where Xτ is a linearly interpolated state Xτ =

τ X1 + (1 − τ )X0. The model is optimized using a standard Flow Matching Mean Squared Error (MSE) objective: 

Lflow = Eτ, X0,X1

∥vθ (Xτ , τ, C) − (X1 − X0)∥22

 (3) Furthermore, Rectified Flow yields straight-path probability flows, allowing flexible inference-time computation. We train the ODE integration with high-fidelity steps, but dynamically truncate waypoint generation to fewer evaluation steps during deployment, striking an optimal balance between generation quality and efficiency. Notably, during the generation, as there is no causal mask to distinguish between temporal steps ∆x1 and ∆xt, we ap-ply rotary position embedding [29] on the noisy displacement tokens to provide a strong temporal signal. 

2) Complexity-Optimized Conditioning via Cross-Attention Injection: An important design choice in 

OmniV2X is how the multi-modal context sequence C

conditions the generated trajectory. Prefix conditioning has proven effective in language foundation models, in which the generation context is prefilled and an autoregressive decoder iteratively generates the next token. This approach concatenates the condition sequence of length L with the generated target horizon of length Ht at time step t and then computes causal self-attention over the joint sequence. This attention calculation yields a computational complexity of O(( L + H)2) = O(L2 + 2 LH + H2).In the context of E2E cooperative driving, the context length (comprising hundreds of visual patches and V2X tokens) vastly exceeds the future waypoint horizon ( L ≫ H). Consequently, the O(L2) term becomes a critical compu-tational bottleneck, especially regarding memory require-ments. To resolve this, OmniV2X utilizes cross-attention injection . The generated waypoint tokens perform self-attention in O(H2) to maintain temporal kinematic consis-tency, and query the context sequence C exclusively via cross-attention in O(LH ). Unlike the recent query-based BEV-fusion paradigm, our action-sourced queries ( Q) serve as active probes, retrieving routing and safety-related features from conditioning tokens. By removing the inter-context self-attention overhead among the condition tokens, the attention complexity is drastically reduced to O(LH + H2), enabling real-time generation on edge computing hardware. 

C. Two-Stage Training and Knowledge Transfer 

The decoupled sequence formulation of OmniV2X nat-urally supports a two-stage training pipeline, allowing the model to learn general driving kinematics from large-scale ego-centric data before efficiently adapting to additional V2X input. This training strategy directly addresses the data scarcity of real-world cooperative datasets by maximizing the utility of abundant single-vehicle driving logs. 

Ego-Centric Driving Pre-training: In the first stage, Om-niV2X is pre-trained on large-scale, single-agent datasets. During this phase, the generative planner establishes a foun-dational driving prior by learning to map front-view visual features, navigational commands, and optional topological map information to safe future trajectories. The model ef-fectively captures core kinematic behaviors, such as lane fol-lowing, intersection navigation, and basic obstacle avoidance, without requiring any infrastructure-provided context. 

V2X Cooperation Adaptation: In the second stage, the model is fine-tuned on the target cooperative dataset (e.g., DAIR-V2X). Because OmniV2X processes inputs as a unified sequence, incorporating infrastructure data does not require modifying the model architecture; the encoded V2X tokens (Cv2x ) are simply appended to the single-agent context sequence C.Throughout training, the visual backbone remains frozen to maintain a stable visual feature space. The generative planner leverages its pre-trained driving prior and adjusts its cross-attention distribution to attend to the newly appended TABLE I: Quantitative evaluation of open-loop trajectory planning on the DAIR-V2X cooperative benchmark. Results for 

OmniV2X are reported as the mean ± standard deviation across 10 different seeds. Baseline results are reported by UniMM-V2X [2]. Methods in gray text utilize vector maps. Best comparable results are in bold .                                                                                                 

> Method V2X Message Type Trans. Cost (BPS) ↓
> L2 Error (m) ↓3s Avg. Col. Rate (%) ↓PDMS ↑
> 1s 2s 3s Avg.
> Ego-Only  VAD [7] [ICCV’23]
> ——1.65 2.72 3.80 2.72 1.12 —UniAD [6] [CVPR’23] 1.26 2.22 3.06 2.18 1.13 SparseDrive [9] [ICRA’25] 1.02 1.69 2.37 1.69 0.99
> Coop V2X  V2VNet [19] [ECCV’20] BEV Features 8.19 ×10 71.96 2.37 3.41 2.58 0.88 —CooperNaut [20] [CVPR’22] BEV Features 8.19 ×10 72.69 4.07 5.50 4.09 1.42 UniV2X [1] [AAAI’25] Queries & Occ. 8.09 ×10 51.45 2.19 3.04 2.23 0.25 UniMM-V2X [2] [AAAI’26] Queries & Occ. 9.32 ×10 50.78 1.63 2.05 1.49 0.12
> Ours  OmniV2X SDSM 1,408 0.45 ±0.01 0.83 ±0.01 1.29 ±0.01 0.86 ±0.01 0.06 ±0.02 88.33 ±0.23
> OmniV2X (w/ Map) SDSM & MAP 25,792 0.45 ±0.00 0.83 ±0.00 1.30 ±0.00 0.86 ±0.00 0.01 ±0.01 89.87 ±0.18

V2X tokens. This structural continuity mitigates forgetting of the pre-trained driving prior and enables highly data-efficient transfer learning, allowing the model to adapt to cooperative settings using only a small fraction of the target dataset. The primary supervision is the flow matching loss for future waypoint generation. For the optional map input consisting of multiple polylines, we employ an auxiliary map reconstruction head. A lightweight decoder reconstructs the map context sequence to predict lane-level polylines, thereby forcing the map message encoder to preserve all geometric information from the map. This auxiliary decoder is dis-carded during inference, incurring no deployment overhead. IV. EXPERIMENTS To evaluate the proposed OmniV2X framework, our experi-ments are designed to systematically validate its architectural advantages and the feasibility of practical deployment. First, we benchmark OmniV2X against state-of-the-art cooperative baselines, focusing on planning performance and communi-cation efficiency. We then investigate whether our decoupled multi-modal token interface successfully bridges the V2X data scarcity gap via data-efficient transfer learning from a pre-trained ego-centric driving foundation model. Third, we validate the architectural generalizability of OmniV2X by comparing a Flow Matching planner against an Autoregres-sive (AR) planner. Finally, we test the system’s robustness to real-world deployment challenges by injecting localization noise and conducting a V2X-augmented field test. 

A. Experimental Setup 

Datasets. We establish the foundational capability of single-agent end-to-end autonomous driving by conducting large-scale ego-centric pre-training on the navtrain split of the nu-Plan dataset [4], [30]. For cooperative fine-tuning and evalua-tion, we utilize the real-world DAIR-V2X-Seq benchmark [5]. We use the training and validation splits provided by UniV2X [1] to ensure a fair comparison. This dataset features complex intersections and highly interactive traffic, providing a rig-orous testbed for real-world V2X deployment. Because the nuPlan and DAIR-V2X-Seq datasets were collected in com-pletely different regions, there is no data leakage between the validation sets in our setting. 

Implementation Details. The visual perception module uti-lizes a frozen DINOv3-ViT-B/16 backbone [31]. The shared hidden dimension across all tokenized modalities is set to 

D = 384 . The model has 130M parameters, of which 44M are trainable. For the SAE-compliant V2X infrastructure context, we limit the maximum token budget to 16 objects and 32 lanes per frame to guarantee low-latency processing. The objects from infrastructure-side perception are generated by a CenterPoint [32] detector, which achieves an AP of 0.72 

for the vehicle category with IoU @ 0 .7. The generative planner use 16 Transformer blocks and 8 attention heads, and is trained using Rectified Flow matching with an ODE integration horizon of 100 steps. We truncate the trajectory generation to 20 evaluation steps, striking an optimal balance between kinematic fidelity and execution efficiency. All models are trained using the AdamW optimizer. Pretraining was performed on a single NVIDIA A100-40GB for fewer than 40 hours, and the V2X adaptation stage was performed on an NVIDIA RTX 5090 for less than 10 hours. 

Metrics. We evaluate open-loop trajectory planning quality using the Average L2 Error (m) at 1.0s, 2.0s, and 3.0sfuture horizons, following UniMMV2X [2]. Communication efficiency is measured by Communication Cost (Bytes Per Second, BPS). Safety is evaluated via the open-loop Collision Rate (%), calculated against ground-truth bounding boxes. To rigorously assess physical drivability, we employ the Predic-tive Driver Model Score (PDMS) [4]. PDMS conducts an ego-closed-loop evaluation by treating the predicted trajec-tory as a reference command and evaluating a corresponding kinematically feasible updated trajectory. The final score evaluates the planning by multiplying strict binary safety criteria (At-fault Collision and Out of Road) with a weighted sum of continuous driving metrics (ego route progress, time-to-collision, and comfort). The missing routing and drivable-area information are inferred from the static map provided by the DAIR-V2X-Seq dataset. Unless otherwise specified, all results are obtained with a fixed seed, without cherry-picking. 

B. State-of-the-Art Cooperative Driving Benchmarking 

We compare OmniV2X against state-of-the-art single-agent baselines and V2X cooperative driving methods on the DAIR-V2X-Seq benchmark, following the same input TABLE II: Metric based on Predictive Driver Model Scores (PDMS) for OmniV2X . Scores listed are the average of 5 runs with different seeds.                      

> Metric OmniV2X OmniV2X (w/ Map)
> Comfort 99.10 99.74 (+0.64)
> Drivable Area 94.92 94.78 (-0.14)
> Ego Progress 84.46 85.32 (+0.86)
> No-Fault Collision 97.47 99.08 (+1.61)
> Time-to-Collision 95.79 98.00 (+2.21)
> Total PDMS 88.33 89.87 (+1.54)

settings as UniMMV2X [2]. The quantitative results are summarized in Table I. 

Projection-Free Superior Performance. As shown in Ta-ble I, OmniV2X establishes a new state-of-the-art in end-to-end cooperative driving. Compared with previous meth-ods, including the most recent UniMM-V2X [2], OmniV2X 

achieves the lowest Average L2 Error ( 0.86 m compared to 1.49 m) and reduces the Average Collision Rate to a near-perfect 0.06 %, without ego-view perception-label su-pervision. Notably, as our method avoids the computation-intensive dense BEV feature processing and only executes token-level sparse computing, OmniV2X only requires 550 MB GPU memory during inference, which is less than 8.5% of the previous SoTA (UniMM-V2X [2] requires 6483 

MB, as reported.) Due to the stochastic nature of the Flow Matching Transformer, we run the experiments with 10 

different random seeds and report the mean performance and standard deviation. 

Ultra-Low Bandwidth Consumption. A major deploy-ment bottleneck for current cooperative driving is the com-munication bandwidth required to transmit features, and the mismatch between model-specific features and SAE-standard V2X messages. Recent query-based methods com-press the heavy BEV feature payload into occupancy maps and queries, but they still consume 8.09 × 10 5 BPS. By seamlessly integrating SAE-standard Sensor Data Sharing Messages (SDSM) as independent conditioning tokens, Om-niV2X reduces communication bandwidth requirements to 

1408 BPS , a reduction of over 574 × compared to previous methods under the same message rate assumption 2.

Impact of Supplemented Static Map. When optionally supplemented with standard MAP messages (the gray row in Table I), the L2 error remains highly competitive, while the average collision rate further drops from 0.06% to 0.01% .As the open-loop metrics become saturated, we compare the two variants using PDMS, as shown in Table II. Safety-related metrics, including No-Fault Collision and Time-to-Collision, achieve the largest improvements, resulting in an overall PDMS improvement of 1.54 .This indicates that explicit topological information from the map message serves as a structural hint that further refines the generation of continuous displacements over            

> 2The communication volume is calculated as 16 objects ×44 Bytes ×
> 2FPS = 1408 BPS. An empirical communication volume, measured by the average size of the parsed JSON object, is 4231 BPS, corresponding to a191 ×reduction.

TABLE III: Data-Efficient Adaptation on DAIR-V2X-Seq.                    

> Pre-training Target V2X Data Avg. L2 (m) ↓Avg. PDMS ↑
> From Scratch 100% 1.5590 82.72
> navtrain from nuPlan 1% 0.8894 (-43.0%) 88.04 (+6.4%) 10% 0.8618 88.08 20% 0.8585 88.20 50% 0.8614 88.47 100% 0.8529 88.39

TABLE IV: Adaptation of Different Generative Models.                    

> Generative Planner Setting Avg. L2 (m) ↓Avg. PDMS ↑
> Autoregressive From Scratch 1.5420 76.55 Pre-trained 1.3499 (-12.5%) 80.31 (+4.9%)
> Flow Matching From Scratch 1.5590 82.72 Pre-trained 0.8529 (-45.3%) 88.39 (+6.9%)

extended horizons. Although this information is not included in previously benchmarked methods, we believe that, in the context of vehicle-to-infrastructure (V2I) cooperation, receiv-ing a vectorized map from roadside units is feasible and compliant with existing standards. Moreover, even with MAP messages included, the total bandwidth ( 25792 BPS) remains significantly lower than feature-based sharing paradigms. 

C. Data-Efficient Knowledge Transfer 

To validate the claim that the domain-stable sequence interface mitigates data scarcity, we evaluate the model fine-tuned on different split sizes. As detailed in Table III, the limited size of the V2X dataset constrains the model’s ability to learn basic planning capabilities. With our design of a stable context feature space, the generative foundation planner can be adapted to the new dataset using just 1% of the V2X data. Increased V2X data scale improves the model’s utilization of V2X messages. We owe the significant performance gain from pretraining to our design of unified context sequences, since existing methods also use pretrained BEVFormer [33] as a starting point but do not achieve similar performance. 

D. System Ablations and Scalability 

Generalizability to Different Generative Models. To demonstrate that our framework is architecture-agnostic, we replace the cross-attention-conditioned Flow Transformer backbone with a prefix-conditioned Autoregressive (AR) backbone. As shown in Table IV, the AR backbone also demonstrates strong knowledge transfer capability across datasets. However, the Flow Transformer maintains a distinct advantage due to non-causal smoothing and significantly lower computational complexity via cross-attention injection. 

Communication & Computation Resources Analysis. 

Edge devices face strict constraints. In Fig. 3a (Left), we analyze the trade-off between communication bandwidth (scaling the token budget M ) and planning accuracy. Though the overall average improvement of the L2 error is only 5.6% due to the superior single-agent performance, we noticed a 

11 .9% improvement from no communication to abundant communication budget on a tough subset. We also tested the inference performance on an edge device (NVIDIA Jetson (a) Communication Resource. (b) Computation Resource. 

Fig. 3: Performance-resource trade-offs. 

Fig. 4: Robustness to ego localization error. Thor) without quantization. In Fig. 3b, we demonstrate the flexible inference-time computation uniquely enabled by flow matching. An acceleration to a maximum of 29 FPS can be achieved without sacrificing much planning performance. 

E. System Robustness & V2X-Augmented Field Testing 

While open-loop metrics evaluate the method using stan-dardized evaluation protocols, cooperative planning safety depends heavily on robustness to real-world noisy inputs. 

Robustness to Input Degradation. We evaluate 3 de-ployment degradations: ego-localization perturbations, V2X latency, and infrastructure perception degradation. In the 

OmniV2X framework, although we remove the need for precise calibration between ego-vehicle and infrastructure sensors by bypassing rigid spatial fusions, it still requires a reliable ego-vehicle pose to interpret object coordinates from GNSS. To evaluate the system’s robustness to localization errors, we inject varying levels of noise into the relative translation and rotation matrices, ranging from a mild per-turbation of 0.1 m/ 0.01 rad to an extreme perturbation of 

5.0 m/ 0.5 rad . Note that the noise is injected on top of the inherent noise of the real-world dataset. Results are shown in Figure 4, showing that OmniV2X maintains high robustness with a localization noise below 1.0 m/ 0.1 rad . We also test the system’s robustness towards latency and the quality of V2X messages: the average L2 error at an injected 500 ms latency is 0.853 m, and the average L2 error at a 30% object dropout and a 0.5 m detection error is 0.869 m, both within a small margin of the original dataset setting. 

V2X-Augmented Field Testing. Finally, we deploy Om-niV2X onto a real-world automated vehicle. We collect 

Fig. 5: Real-world demonstration of V2X cooperative driv-ing. The LiDAR point cloud is only used for visualization. a single-vehicle dataset and augment it with virtual V2X messages and corresponding optimal waypoints. The aug-mented V2X messages have a simulated latency of 100 ms, comprising the typical latency of roadside perception systems and the C-V2X sidelink communication latency. The dataset is collected at a parking lot. We consider it more challenging than the previously benchmarked dataset, as it includes severe occlusions, unclear lane markings, and less predictable agent movements than in typical urban scenarios. We split the data into 346 train and 228 val samples, strictly by isolated route, to minimize correlation between the two sets. Adapted from the model pretrained on navsim and fine-tuned on DAIR-V2X-Seq, OmniV2X achieves an average L2 error of 1.14 m on the validation set of our augmented dataset. As shown in the sequential rollout in Fig. 5, we validate the system against a typical occlusion event: a pedestrian appears from behind a vehicle on the road. OmniV2X ac-tively reacts to the pedestrian’s existence and decelerates in advance, avoiding a hard brake or a potential crash. V. C ONCLUSION 

In this paper, we presented OmniV2X , a scalable and highly efficient generative foundation planner that reshapes the paradigm of end-to-end cooperative driving. Departing from the conventional approach of computationally heavy and rigid spatial feature fusion, OmniV2X reformulates multi-agent cooperation as a multi-source conditional sequence generation task. By processing V2X messages and ego-centric visual features as independent context tokens via cross-attention injection, our framework successfully by-passes the spatial alignment constraints and memory bot-tlenecks of dense 3D representations. Extensive evaluations and robustness validation on the DAIR-V2X-Seq benchmark, our own augmented real-world dataset, and field testing, demonstrate that OmniV2X establishes a new state-of-the-art in planning safety and accuracy. More importantly, it operates at up to 29 FPS in real time, while consuming less than 1% of the communication bandwidth and requiring 8.5% of the inference memory, compared with existing meth-ods. Furthermore, our unified context sequence effectively bridges the gap in cooperative data scarcity, enabling the model to adapt a pre-trained single-agent driving model to V2X scenarios using less than 10% of the full target dataset. 

Limitations and Future Work. The imitation learning bottleneck is the main limitation of the benchmarked perfor-mance. While DAIR-V2X-Seq and its benchmark create a gap between ego-sensor-based planning and expert planning (human driver) by enabling only a front-view camera, fully V2X-assisted driving can only be achieved by an agent with complete V2X input. Future work will explore improv-ing the method beyond human experts and scaling up the safety-critical testing from the current small-scale augmented dataset to large-scale closed-loop validation. REFERENCES [1] H. Yu, W. Yang, J. Zhong, Z. Yang, S. Fan, P. Luo, and Z. Nie, “End-to-End Autonomous Driving Through V2X Cooperation,” Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , vol. 39, no. 9, pp. 9598–9606, Apr. 2025. [2] Z. Song, C. Xia, C. Wang, H. Yu, S. Zhou, and Z. Niu, “UniMM-V2X: MoE-Enhanced Multi-Level Fusion for End-to-End Cooperative Autonomous Driving,” Nov. 2025, arXiv:2511.09013 [cs]. [3] H. Caesar, V. Bankiti, A. H. Lang, S. Vora, V. E. Liong, Q. Xu, A. Krishnan, Y. Pan, G. Baldan, and O. Beijbom, “nuscenes: A multimodal dataset for autonomous driving,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , June 2020, pp. 11 621–11 631. [4] D. Dauner, M. Hallgarten, T. Li, X. Weng, Z. Huang, Z. Yang, H. Li, I. Gilitschenski, B. Ivanovic, M. Pavone, A. Geiger, and K. Chitta, “NAVSIM: Data-Driven Non-Reactive Autonomous Vehicle Simula-tion and Benchmarking,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 37, pp. 28 706–28 719, Dec. 2024. [5] H. Yu, W. Yang, H. Ruan, Z. Yang, Y. Tang, X. Gao, X. Hao, Y. Shi, Y. Pan, N. Sun, J. Song, J. Yuan, P. Luo, and Z. Nie, “V2x-seq: A large-scale sequential dataset for vehicle-infrastructure cooperative percep-tion and forecasting,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , June 2023, pp. 5486–5495. [6] Y. Hu, J. Yang, L. Chen, K. Li, C. Sima, X. Zhu, S. Chai, S. Du, T. Lin, W. Wang, L. Lu, X. Jia, Q. Liu, J. Dai, Y. Qiao, and H. Li, “Planning-oriented autonomous driving,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , June 2023, pp. 17 853–17 862. [7] B. Jiang, S. Chen, Q. Xu, B. Liao, J. Chen, H. Zhou, Q. Zhang, W. Liu, C. Huang, and X. Wang, “Vad: Vectorized scene representation for efficient autonomous driving,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , October 2023, pp. 8340–8350. [8] Z. Li, K. Li, S. Wang, S. Lan, Z. Yu, Y. Ji, Z. Li, Z. Zhu, J. Kautz, Z. Wu, Y.-G. Jiang, and J. M. Alvarez, “Hydra-MDP: End-to-end Multimodal Planning with Multi-target Hydra-Distillation,” Aug. 2024, arXiv:2406.06978 [cs]. [9] W. Sun, X. Lin, Y. Shi, C. Zhang, H. Wu, and S. Zheng, “SparseDrive: End-to-End Autonomous Driving via Sparse Scene Representation,” in 2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , May 2025, pp. 8795–8801. [10] W. Zheng, R. Song, X. Guo, C. Zhang, and L. Chen, “GenAD: Genera-tive End-to-End Autonomous Driving,” Apr. 2024, arXiv:2402.11502. [11] B. Liao, S. Chen, H. Yin, B. Jiang, C. Wang, S. Yan, X. Zhang, X. Li, Y. Zhang, Q. Zhang, and X. Wang, “Diffusiondrive: Truncated diffu-sion model for end-to-end autonomous driving,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , June 2025, pp. 12 037–12 047. [12] C. Sima, K. Renz, K. Chitta, L. Chen, H. Zhang, C. Xie, J. Beißwenger, P. Luo, A. Geiger, and H. Li, “DriveLM: Driving with Graph Visual Question Answering,” Jul. 2024, arXiv:2312.14150. [13] T. Wang, E. Xie, R. Chu, Z. Li, and P. Luo, “DriveCoT: Integrating Chain-of-Thought Reasoning with End-to-End Driving,” Mar. 2024, arXiv:2403.16996. [14] J.-J. Hwang, R. Xu, H. Lin, W.-C. Hung, J. Ji, K. Choi, D. Huang, T. He, P. Covington, B. Sapp, J. Guo, D. Anguelov, and M. Tan, “EMMA: End-to-End Multimodal Model for Autonomous Driving,” Oct. 2024, arXiv:2410.23262 [cs] version: 1. [15] NVIDIA, Y. Wang, W. Luo, J. Bai, Y. Cao, T. Che, K. Chen, Y. Chen, J. Diamond, Y. Ding, W. Ding, L. Feng, G. Heinrich, J. Huang, P. Karkus, B. Li, P. Li, T.-Y. Lin, D. Liu, M.-Y. Liu, L. Liu, Z. Liu, J. Lu, Y. Mao, P. Molchanov, L. Pavao, Z. Peng, M. Ranzinger, E. Schmerling, S. Shen, Y. Shi, S. Tariq, R. Tian, T. Wekel, X. Weng, T. Xiao, E. Yang, X. Yang, Y. You, X. Zeng, W. Zhang, B. Ivanovic, and M. Pavone, “Alpamayo-R1: Bridging Reasoning and Action Prediction for Generalizable Autonomous Driving in the Long Tail,” Jan. 2026, arXiv:2511.00088 [cs]. [16] Y. Li, K. Xiong, X. Guo, F. Li, S. Yan, G. Xu, L. Zhou, L. Chen, H. Sun, B. Wang, K. Ma, G. Chen, H. Ye, W. Liu, and X. Wang, “ReCogDrive: A Reinforced Cognitive Framework for End-to-End Autonomous Driving,” Sep. 2025, arXiv:2506.08052 [cs]. [17] C. Cui, Y. Zhou, J. Peng, S.-Y. Park, Z. Yang, P. Sankaranarayanan, J. Zhang, R. Zhang, and Z. Wang, “ViLaD: A Large Vision Language Diffusion Framework for End-to-End Autonomous Driving,” Aug. 2025, arXiv:2508.12603 [cs]. [18] Y. Gu, Y. Wang, Y. Chen, Y. You, W. Luo, Y. Wang, W. Ding, B. Li, H. Yang, B. Ivanovic, and M. Pavone, “Accelerating Structured Chain-of-Thought in Autonomous Vehicles,” Feb. 2026, arXiv:2602.02864 [cs]. [19] T.-H. Wang, S. Manivasagam, M. Liang, B. Yang, W. Zeng, and R. Urtasun, “V2VNet: Vehicle-to-Vehicle Communication for Joint Perception and Prediction,” in Computer Vision – ECCV 2020 ,A. Vedaldi, H. Bischof, T. Brox, and J.-M. Frahm, Eds. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2020, vol. 12347, pp. 605–621, series Title: Lecture Notes in Computer Science. [20] J. Cui, H. Qiu, D. Chen, P. Stone, and Y. Zhu, “Coopernaut: End-to-end driving with cooperative perception for networked vehicles,” in 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , June 2022, pp. 17 252–17 262. [21] R. Xu, Z. Tu, H. Xiang, W. Shao, B. Zhou, and J. Ma, “CoBEVT: Cooperative Bird’s Eye View Semantic Segmentation with Sparse Transformers,” in Proceedings of The 6th Conference on Robot Learn-ing . PMLR, Mar. 2023, pp. 989–1000. [22] J. You, H. Shi, Z. Jiang, Z. Huang, R. Gan, K. Wu, X. Cheng, X. Li, and B. Ran, “V2X-VLM: End-to-End V2X Cooperative Au-tonomous Driving Through Large Vision-Language Models,” Jun. 2025, arXiv:2408.09251 [cs]. [23] X. Gao, Y. Wu, R. Wang, C. Liu, Y. Zhou, and Z. Tu, “LangCoop: Collaborative Driving with Language,” Apr. 2025, arXiv:2504.13406 [cs]. [24] C. Liu, G. Liu, Z. Wang, J. Yang, and S. Chen, “CoLMDriver: LLM-based Negotiation Benefits Cooperative Autonomous Driving,” Mar. 2025, arXiv:2503.08683 [cs]. [25] M. Zhu, Y. Zhu, Y. Zhu, Q. Chen, D. Qu, S. Fu, and Q. Yang, “M3CAD: Towards Generic Cooperative Autonomous Driving Bench-mark,” May 2025, arXiv:2505.06746 [cs]. [26] Y. Zhu, M. Zhu, Q. Chen, D. Qu, I. Luo, S. Fu, and Q. Yang, “From Features to Reference Points: Lightweight and Adaptive Fusion for Cooperative Autonomous Driving,” Jan. 2026, arXiv:2511.18757 [cs]. [27] SAE International, “V2X Sensor-Sharing for Cooperative and Auto-mated Driving,” SAE International, Warrendale, PA, USA, Standard J3224 202208, Aug. 2022. [28] ——, “V2X Communications Message Set Dictionary,” SAE Interna-tional, Warrendale, PA, USA, Standard J2735 202409, Sep. 2024. [29] J. Su, M. Ahmed, Y. Lu, S. Pan, W. Bo, and Y. Liu, “RoFormer: Enhanced transformer with Rotary Position Embedding,” Neurocom-puting , vol. 568, p. 127063, Feb. 2024. [30] H. Caesar, J. Kabzan, K. S. Tan, W. K. Fong, E. Wolff, A. Lang, L. Fletcher, O. Beijbom, and S. Omari, “NuPlan: A closed-loop ML-based planning benchmark for autonomous vehicles,” Feb. 2022, arXiv:2106.11810 [cs]. [31] O. Sim´ eoni, H. V. Vo, M. Seitzer, F. Baldassarre, M. Oquab, C. Jose, V. Khalidov, M. Szafraniec, S. Yi, M. Ramamonjisoa, F. Massa, D. Haziza, L. Wehrstedt, J. Wang, T. Darcet, T. Moutakanni, L. Sen-tana, C. Roberts, A. Vedaldi, J. Tolan, J. Brandt, C. Couprie, J. Mairal, H. J´ egou, P. Labatut, and P. Bojanowski, “DINOv3,” Aug. 2025, arXiv:2508.10104 [cs]. [32] T. Yin, X. Zhou, and P. Krahenbuhl, “Center-based 3D Object De-tection and Tracking,” in 2021 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) . Nashville, TN, USA: IEEE, Jun. 2021, pp. 11 779–11 788. [33] Z. Li, W. Wang, H. Li, E. Xie, C. Sima, T. Lu, Q. Yu, and J. Dai, “BEVFormer: Learning Bird’s-Eye-View Representation From LiDAR-Camera via Spatiotemporal Transformers,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , vol. 47, no. 3, pp. 2020– 2036, Mar. 2025.